---
layout: post
project: "swipe_and_shoot_battlefield"
title: "Procedual Terrain"
long-title: "Procedual Terrain using Layered Heightmaps"
date: 2020-08-12
date-path: "2020/08/12"
author: "Jack Southard"
youtubeId:
noise-images:
- filename: "rawNoise.png"
  caption: "Raw perlin noise is too smooth on its own to look realistic."
- filename: "layeredNoise.png"
  caption: "However if you layer it on top of itself at different scales and intensities, it emulates rocky terrain."
hill-noise-images:
- filename: "topViewHillMask.png"
  caption: "The hill mask made up of large scale noise with a cutoff value to create large black areas and normalized back to a range of 0 to 1."
- filename: "topViewDetails.png"
  caption: "A more fine heightmap which will add details to the hills to make them less smooth."
border-noise-images:
- filename: "topViewBorderFalloff.png"
  caption: "The falloff map. Generated by assinging a value to each pixel based on a square distance to the center of the map."
- filename: "topViewBorderHills.png"
  caption: "The border hills heightmap. Used to break up the uniformity of the falloff."
result-images:
- filename: "topViewFinal.png"
  caption: "The final heightmap."
- filename: "topViewFinalTerrain.png"
  caption: "Top view of the terrain generated from the heightmap"
landscape-images-1:
- filename: "landscape0.png"
- filename: "landscape2.png"
- filename: "landscape3.png"
- filename: "landscape1.png"
---

{% include post-gallery.html set=page.landscape-images-1 %}

## Introduction
I was recently tasked with procedually generating desert landscapes for our game Swipe and Shoot Battlefield. What was unique about this challenge was the terrain had to be prodominantly flat and accomidating for large battles while also being mountainous and interesting. I knew I would need to generate a heightmap for my terrain using perlin noise so thats where I began.

## What is a Heightmap?
A [heightmap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heightmap) is a topographic map of terrain, typically an image, which stores a height value with each pixel. Black represents the lowest height and white represents the greatest.

A common technique when generating terrain heightmaps uses layered perlin noise. I was first introduced to this concept by Sebastian Lague in his [video on procedural landmass generation](https://youtu.be/wbpMiKiSKm8?t=31) which offers a fantastic introduction to layered perlin noise.

{% include post-gallery.html set=page.noise-images %}

Using this I could easily create a rough mountainous landscape. However, this lacked the large flat areas I needed. Additionally, I wanted mountains wraping around the edge of the map. It was obvious that randomly layered noise wouldn't be enough alone.

# Layering Heightmaps
## Creating Hills
I figured out that if I could combine different heightmaps in the right ways, I could create the terrain I wanted. The most basic thing I wanted was flat regions of the map and mountainous ones. I figured if I could generate a "hill mask" I could combine it with my mountainous noise to only allow mountains in certain areas of the map.

{% include post-gallery.html set=page.hill-noise-images %}

The general shape of the mountains and hills is based off of the large scale hill mask. The details are added on top of that to break up the uniformity. A new heightmap is created by looping through each pixel and deriving a new value with the math function:

{% highlight ruby linenos %}
newValue = (sourceValue * (1 - additionPower) + additionValue * additionPower) * sourceValue
{% endhighlight %}

where the source is the hill mask and the addition is the detail heightmap. This function averages the two with a variable power, perfect for adding details without overpowering the hill mask.

## Creating Mountainous Borders
To create borders, I knew I needed to use a falloff map to encourage the terrain to be higher around the edges of the map. The main problem with directly increasing the height of the terrain near the borders is that it will look far too unnatural. Therefore, we need to combine the uniform falloff with noise. While I admit the final result isn't perfect, it fullfilled its purpose.

{% include post-gallery.html set=page.border-noise-images %}

Admittedly it took me a while to figure out the best way to combine these two heightmaps. However, I eventaully settled on simply multiplying them together:

{% highlight ruby linenos %}
newValue = sourceValue * additionValue
{% endhighlight %}

I then combined this new border hills heightmap with the previously generated hills heightmap with simple max function:

{% highlight ruby linenos %}
newValue = Max(sourceValue, additionValue)
{% endhighlight %}

## Create Terraces
I knew our soldiers would have trouble climbing mountains, but still wanted them to be able to navigate and fight on them. Luckily, deserts commonly have plateaus so it made sense to terrace the terrain.

To add terraces we need to flatten a range of height values. This requires a bit of math as simply rounding height values to the nearest terrace height would look completely unnatural. However, I created the following function to do it:

{% highlight ruby linenos %}
if (sourceVal > terraceHeight) {
    newValue = (soureVal - terracePull) / (1 - terracePull)
    if (newValue < terraceHeight) newValue = terraceHeight
}
{% endhighlight %}

The function recieves a height to flatten at and a pull value which is the amount of terrain above it that should be pulled down and flattened. In order to maintain the same original height for the terrain after it gets lowered, we have to scale up the lowered terrain vertically.

## The Result
{% include post-gallery.html set=page.result-images %}

## Layering Visualized
{% include mp4-video.html path="blog/2020/08/12/terrainShowcase" %}

## Conclusion
While there are certainly improvements I can make to the terrain generation, it serves its purpose well. Though I only demonstrated how layering noise can be used to create stylized desert enviornments, the techniques shown above can be used anywhere with a little tweaking and imagination.

To explore the code or use it in your own project, [checkout the GitHub repository.](https://github.com/jacksouthard/LayeredHeightmapTerrain)
